Half of approved cancer drugs don't have
proof they extend survival for any of
their approved uses. We're spending
enormous amounts of money on drugs that
we don't really know how much they're
actually going to help patients. The
primary motive of a pharmaceutical
industry is to generate profits for
shareholders. There can be pressure to
move clinical trials through quickly and
approve medicines
on perhaps uncertain evidence because
there's massive financial forces behind
that.
If they become sick, it doesn't only
affect the patient. It affects the whole
family.
It was
very frightening. Really, in hindsight,
he would have been better off not having
that second line of treatment. It's
quite simple. If you give lower dosages,
there's less revenue.
I believe that the role of clinicians
and researchers is to try to focus on
the needs of patients. And sometimes
these needs collide,
and it can create a storm.
I'm Michael Colvin.
I'm Stella Colvin. And I'm going to jump
backwards.
And what are you going to do?
>> I'm going to twirl around and He loved
taking videos of them. Go!
I'm going to be doing
even the what would be the most perhaps
unexciting thing.
>> thing I'm
going to be doing
is
a handstand.
Something fell out. What is that?
[Music]
I wonder what your birthday present is.
It's It's for the Terrace Swiftie and I
want to and I'm a royal tour. My late
husband had a very aggressive cancer.
From the time of his diagnosis until his
first treatment, his health was really
deteriorating.
In 2014, Rachel Colvin's husband, Ken,
was diagnosed in his late 40s with
adenocarcinoma.
In his case, a cancer that developed at
the junction of his esophagus and
stomach. After a successful round of
chemotherapy a year later, the cancer
spread to his brain. His doctors tried a
second round of treatment. He ended up
getting an infection in his intestines
and spent several weeks in the hospital.
It was very frightening.
Really, in hindsight, he would have been
better off not having that second line
of treatment.
>> After a 16-month battle with cancer, Ken
died in 2016
at the age of 49.
There are so many happy memories
in here.
And so many fun things that we did
together as a family.
[Music]
I wanted the kids to
have a book of photos and memories of
their dad.
My dad loved my mom. My dad was brave.
I love you. My dad loved me, too.
My daughter has said, "Mommy, I wish
Daddy picked the last few months just to
focus on us and not focus so much on
treatment." He missed out on a lot of
the day-to-day things of just being at
home and just enjoying what little time
he had left. Science, in general, does a
really good job of
quantifying time to progression of
disease, time for survival, but they
don't do a good job describing the
quality of that time within someone's
life.
Canadian Tire It's Canadian Tire Center.
It's in Ottawa.
And we're going to give you the same
dose of rucaparib that we did last time.
I think we're going to go up a little
bit on that, but we're not going to add
a second drug in now. Okay. And let's
see how this one goes. I suspect it'll
be fine, but that's Dr. Chris Booth was
Ken Colvin's oncologist. He believes
that some cancer drugs are being rushed
to market. The cancer research ecosystem
and the regulatory system has tremendous
pressure to move clinical trials through
quickly and approve medicines on perhaps
uncertain evidence because there's
massive financial forces behind that.
Over the last couple of decades, the
median number of people in trials for
cancer drugs seeking to win approval has
shrunk dramatically. One of the advocacy
initiatives that we've launched to try
to tackle some of these issues in the
last couple of years is called Common
Sense Oncology. And this is really a
global grassroots coalition. We want to
raise the bar and be very clear that
we're identifying treatments that make a
real difference in the lives of
patients. And you'll get the the one
drug which we're doing today plus the
new drug.
There's a growing recognition that
perhaps some of these treatments are not
as helpful as we might expect or hope,
and certainly not as helpful as patients
deserve. Could they be taking away
quality of life and making people sick
without actually helping them live
longer lives?
There's a long history at the FDA
leading up to how they regulate cancer
drugs today. In the '80s and '90s, the
FDA was under heavy criticism from HIV
activists for not moving quickly enough
on, you know, getting, you know, life
potentially life-saving HIV drugs to
market when HIV was a death sentence.
And that led to a new process called
accelerated approval where the FDA
essentially would approve drugs
based on preliminary data that hadn't
yet been fully proven. So, over the last
20 years, the FDA has heavily employed
this accelerated approval process to
approve many cancer drugs.
They're approved often either on tumor
shrinkage alone or on this metric,
progression-free survival. Some people
say that's very misleading because it's
actually not survival. It's mostly, you
know, does the drug delay the growth of
a tumor on a scan? As it turns out, that
metric is not as predictive of actual
survival. But the drug companies and
patient many patient advocates that are
allied with them say, you know, we need
these drugs quickly and need the FDA
quickly and patients can't wait. What
our reporting found was that fully half
of approved cancer drugs
don't have proof they extend survival
for any of their approved uses. We're
spending enormous amounts of money on
drugs that we don't really know how much
they're actually going to help patients.
In the US, private insurance and
programs like Medicare often cover most
treatment costs for cancer. In countries
like India, where the vast majority of
patients can't afford treatments that
can run into the high tens of thousands
of dollars per year, doctors are
experimenting with lower doses to treat
patients. For patients, this would mean
less time in treatment and greater cost
savings. For pharmaceutical companies,
it could also mean less revenue.
In 2014, Hemant Prakash Champaneria
discovered ulcers in his mouth. He kept
them a secret from his family fearing
that he couldn't afford the cost to
treat them.
Champaneria's doctor agreed to waive the
fees for the medication. He prescribed a
treatment that, on paper, shouldn't have
worked, 1/6 of the recommended dose.
Champaneria is not alone. Dr. Kumar
Prabhash works at Tata Memorial Centre,
which registers 50,000 new cancer
patients every year.
25% of their patients have head or neck
cancers, yet few could afford a full
dose of immunotherapy. Some of the drugs
are very good, and we know they are very
useful for our patients.
And it is very disheartening
for clinicians to see that I wish this
treatment was there for this patient.
These cancer patients, if they become
sick, it doesn't only affect the, you
know, patient. It affects the whole
family. So, we finally took the lowest
dose which was there and which was
where the patients had responses in the
phase one. We thought that is something
which majority of our population can
afford it. In a clinical trial, Dr.
Prabhash's team added a low-dose
immunotherapy to the standard treatment
for head and neck cancer in India. The
combination more than doubled the
percentage of patients still alive 1
year later. In a country where there are
often more stories about negative health
care outcomes than positive ones,
doctors may have found a new solution
born out of desperation. Almost 3 to 4%
of our patients could take this
full-dose immunotherapy, and it looks
like almost 60% of our patients can take
the same treatment if the dose changes.
Almost 2/3 of cancers is happening in
developing country. It may end up saving
billions of dollars. It may end up, you
know, benefiting
hundreds of thousands of people.
2,500 miles away in Tel Aviv, Israel,
Dr. Daniel Goldstein, an oncologist and
founding director of the Center for
Cancer Economics, published a study
showing that lower dosing of just one
drug could save $825
million a year in the US alone, while
still being highly effective.
>> We have a tremendous problem in the
whole field of cancer care, where the
expenditures are just increasing and
increasing. Sometimes those costs are
getting passed on to patients. We're
actually funding many drugs that really
are what I would say are poor value and
not and not cost-effective. One of the
things that I focused on over the past 7
or 8 years is trying to figure out if
there are ways that we can
reduce the expenditure, but maintain the
the the health outcomes and the effect.
So, can you give a lower dosage? Can you
use the drug for a reduced amount of
time, but still get the same health
benefit? We also tried to implement it
here in Israel, but when we started to
implement it, there was tremendous
pushback, and it led to a major storm
here in the process of policy
implementation.
The manufacturers do not like research
work or policy work related to using
lower dosages. It's abundantly clear.
It's quite simple. If you give lower
dosages, there's less revenue. The
primary aim of manufacturer is to
increase revenue for their shareholders.
We showed that you can use
essentially 25% less drug, get the same
output, and save tons and tons of health
care resources.
So, we found in our reporting that over
the last two decades, the median initial
price of a cancer drug in the US has
quadrupled. That comes even as there is
no correlation between particularly
between those prices and whether they
improve survival or not. Some of these
so-called immunotherapy drugs, which are
some of the most important targeted
cancer drugs approved in the last 10 to
15 years, are some of the biggest
sellers in the world. If these ultra-low
doses turn out to work, it could be akin
to getting HIV drugs in Africa for the
first time, allowing a large segment of
the world that don't have full access or
can't afford some of these
life-extending drugs, now will finally
get access to them. Since getting the
reduced dose, Shampanikar is recovering.
His tumor shrunk 80%, and he was able to
undergo successful surgery aiming to
remove the rest.
[Music]
Stahli and Michael had a game that they
played with their dad that was called
"Love You Infinity."
And every morning, whoever got up first
had to run and say to the other person,
"I love you infinity." It was a
competition every morning.
So, when I asked them
what they thought would be a good thing
to put on their dad's gravestone,
they said, "Love you infinity."
So, that's what we did.
[Music]
His memory lives on
in all the hard work that's being done
to help patients and their families
really live the best quality of life at
the end of their life.
And that patients and their families
who are in similar situations that
I was once in,
can hopefully make
better, more informed decisions than
perhaps we did.
[Music]